WHY DO CHRISTIANS HAVE DIFFERENT BIBLES?
Excerpted and amplified from the article "Why Do Christians Have
Different Bibles?"

TRADITIO Traditional Roman Catholic Network
E-mail: traditio@traditio.com, Web: www.traditio.com
Copyright 1994-2022 CSM. Reproduction prohibited without authorization.
Last Revised:  01/18/23

                               SUMMARY

Already from the fourth century the canon, or definitive list, of Sacred
Scripture, the inspired books that were authentic were set.  There were
based not on the Old Testament books in Hebrew because the Jews had
substantially lost the Hebrew language when they returned from the
Babylonian Captivity in the sixth century before Christ.  The version of
the Old Testament that was used by the Jews in the centuries immediately
before Christ and by the Christians of the New Testament, was known as
the Septuagint, translated into post-classical Greek in the third century
before Christ by seventy scholars (Latin:  <i>septuaginta</i>) out of the
Great Library of Alexandria in Egypt.

Martin Luther expurgated seven entire books and parts of three others
from his "Protestant" Bible because they didn't conform to the heretical
principles of his New Religion (Protestantism) and did not suit Luther's
anti-Semitism and anti-Catholicism.  Luther claimed that they celebrated
Judaism and because he wanted to justify his challenging the authority of
the Catholic Church, he expurgated them.

In fact, Luther's first German translation was missing 25 books:
Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, Deuteronomy, Esther, Job,
Ecclesiastes, Jonah, Tobias, Judith, Wisdom, Sirach/Ecclesiasticus,
Baruch, 1 and 2 Maccabees, Matthew, Luke, John, Acts, Romans, Hebrews,
James, Jude, and Revelation.

Thus, Luther's Bible contains only 48 of the actual 73 books, or only 65
per cent of the total.  The modern Protestant Bible consists of only 66
books, 39 books in the Old Testament and 27 books in the New Testament.
The original canon of Scripture, based upon the post-classical Greek
version known as the Septuagint (properly accented on the first syllable,
not the second, as it commonly heard among the uneducated), used by the
Jews of the immediate centuries before Christ and by Christ and his
Apostles contains 73 books including Tobias, Judith, Wisdom,
Sirach/Ecclesiasticus, Baruch, and 1 and 2 Maccabees.


                                 OLD TESTAMENT

* Included in King James Version Apocrypha
+ Included in Roman Catholic Deuterocanonical Books.
Abbreviations are from Revised Standard Version--Catholic Edition.

Abbr.     KJV (39)                 Douay (46)
____      --------                 ----------

Gen       Genesis
Ex        Exodus
Lev       Leviticus
Num       Numbers
Deut      Deuteronomy
Josh      Joshua                   Josue
Judg      Judges
Ruth      Ruth
1 Sam     1 Samuel                 1 Kings
2 Sam     2 Samuel                 2 Kings
1 Kings   1 Kings                  3 Kings
2 Kings   2 Kings                  4 Kings
1 Chron   1 Chronicles             1 Paralipomenon
2 Chron   2 Chronicles             2 Paralipomenon
Ezra      Ezra                     1 Esdras
Neh       Nehemiah                 2 Esdras
Tob       Tobit*                   Tobias+
Jud       Judith*                  Judith+
Esther    Esther (additions*)      Esther (part of +)
Job       Job
Ps        Psalms
Prov      Proverbs
Eccles    Ecclesiastes
Song      Song of Solomon          Canticle of Canticles
Wis       Wisdom*                  Wisdom+
Sir       Sirach*                  Ecclesiasticus,
                                   or the Wisdom of Jesus the Son of
                                   Sirach+
Is        Isaiah
Jer       Jeremiah
Lam       Lamentations
Bar       Baruch*                  Baruch 1-5+
          Letter of Jeremiah*      Baruch 6+
Ezek      Ezekiel                  Ezechiel
Dan       Daniel                   Daniel
          Prayer of Azariah*
          & Song of the 3 Young Men*
          Daniel 3 (part of)+
          Susanna*                 Daniel 13+
          Bel & the Dragon*        Daniel 14+
Hos       Hosea                    Osee
          Joel                     Joel
          Amos                     Amos
Obad      Obadiah                  Abdias
Jon       Jonah                    Jonas
Mic       Micah                    Micheas
          Nahum                    Nahum
Hab       Habakkuk                 Habacuc
Zeph      Zephaniah                Sophronias
          Haggai                   Aggeus
Zech      Zechariah                Zacharias
Mal       Malachi                  Malachias
          Wisdom of Solomon*       Wisdom of Solomon+
1 Mac     1 Maccabees*             1 Machabees+
2 Mac     2 Maccabees*             2 Machabees+
          1 Esdras*                3 Esdras+ (appendix)
          2 Esdras*                4 Esdras+ (appendix)
          Prayer of Manasseh*      Prayer of Manasseh+ (appendix)
          Psalm 151*
          3 Maccabees*             3 Maccabees+ (appendix)
          4 Maccabees*             4 Maccabees+ (appendix)


                            NEW TESTAMENT (27)

Mt        Matthew
Mk        Mark
Lk        Luke
Jn        John
Acts      Acts of the Apostles
Rom       Romans
1 Cor     1 Corinthians
2 Cor     2 Corinthians
Gal       Galatians
Eph       Ephesians
Phil      Philippians
Col       Colossians
1 Thess   1 Thessalonians
2 Thess   2 Thessalonians
1 Tim     1 Timothy
2 Tim     2 Timothy
Tit       Titus
Philem    Philemon
Heb       Hebrews
Jas       James
1 Pet     1 Peter
2 Pet     2 Peter
1 Jn      1 John
2 Jn      2 John
3 Jn      3 John
Jude      Jude
Rev       Revelation          Apocalypse


                      THE JEWS AND THEIR BIBLE

In order to understand Christian Bibles, it is first necessary to
take a look at the Jewish Bible.  It is divided into three
sections: the Law, the Prophets, and the Writings.  The Law
consists of the five books of Moses (Genesis to Deuteronomy).
These formed the core of the canon.  "Canon" is a Greek word
meaning "reed," "measuring rod."  The Law, therefore, was the
canon, the measuring rod by which all later works were judged for
correctness.

The next Jewish division of the OT (Old Testament) is the
prophets.  This section contains books written by prophets like
Isaias, Jeremias, etc., and books telling about the activities of
prophets, such as the books of Kings.

The last division of the OT is the Writings, a quite diversified
group, for example, Psalms, Proverbs, Ruth and the apocalyptic
work of Daniel.  As centuries went by, the number of books in the
Writings increased.

Traditional Catholics, the (traditional) Catholic Church, as usual,
follows the right course.  Its Bible, as represented most authoritatively
by St. Jerome's Latin Vulgate, which is followed by translations such as
the Douay-Rheims.  The books contained in these versions  are those used
by Christ Himself and His Apostles.  The Newchurch of the New Order often
yields to the errors of Martin Luther and modern-day Protestants in their
"<i>New</i> American Bible" and "<i>New</i> English Bible.  It is only in
the traditional Catholic Bible that all of the authentic books are
preserved because the (traditional) Catholic Church is the only Church
honest enough to give its followers the <i>full</i> Bible.</b>


                      WHAT IS THE SEPTUAGINT?

The Septuagint (from the Latin meaning "seventy") is a Greek translation
of the original Hebrew Bible, which is no longer extant, as well as of
other Jewish religious writings that are no longer part of the modern
Hebrew Bible, which is based upon a version edited over a millennium
later by the Masoretes.  Thus, the Septuagint is closer to the original
Hebrew Bible than is the present-day Hebrew Bible, which is a version
edited (sometimes in an anti-Christian way).

The Septuagint (abbreviated by its Roman numerals LXX) is the work of
several translators.  It was produced in the 3rd and 2nd centuries B.C.
for Greek-speaking Jews of the Alexandrian age, as Hebrew by that time
was obsolescent by that time.  The LXX has more books in the section
known as the Writings than the modern Hebrew Bible.

The Septuagint, not the Masoretic Text, matches the Dead Sea Scrolls.
The most accurate and reliable version of the Old Testament of Scriptures
is the Septuagint (LXX), not the Masoretic Text of the 9th century.  The
Septuagint was authoritative for the Old Testament from the early Church
on.


               WHAT BIBLE DID JESUS AND HIS DISCIPLES USE?

Strictly speaking, there was no "Bible" then as we have it today.
The canon wasn't closed or fixed during Jesus' lifetime.  There
was no authoritative list.  Any scholarly, objective approach to the
NT (New Testament) substantiates numerous parallels to the
"extra" books contained in the Septuagint (LXX).  The earliest Apostolic
Fathers freely quote from the whole of the LXX as being inspired. When
Jesus or the NT writers quote the Old Testament, they overwhelmingly
quote the Greek Septuagint, not the modernized Hebrew rendition.


               WHEN DID THE JEWS CLOSE THEIR CANON?

Around A.D. 100, rabbis held a Council at Jamnia, Israel.  Since
the Temple  had been destroyed in A.D. 70, Jews needed to secure
their identity, especially in opposition to Jews believing in
Jesus as Messiah.  It is believed that at this meeting they
decided on the present-day Jewish Bible.  However, the authority
of such books as Esther, Proverbs, Canticle of Canticles, Ruth,
Ecclesiastes and Ezekiel were challenged at the meeting and even
later.  Even the book of Sirach, supposedly rejected at the
Council, was quoted by rabbis as inspired for centuries
afterward.

When any people is persecuted, it naturally re-groups and
stresses its national history and language.  Thus in A.D. 130,
after much foreign oppression, the rabbis forbade Jews to read
the Scriptures in Greek from the LXX.  Jews were to read the
Hebrew text only.  Furthermore, Christians had been quoting the
LXX to win converts; Jews could refute their arguments on the
basis of a "faulty translation."  By thus emphasizing Hebrew
language and tradition, the rabbis preserved Jewish social
identity.


     HOW THEN DID THE CHURCH DECIDE WHICH OT BOOKS TO ACCEPT?

From A.D. 90 onward, Christian writers explicitly quote from the
"extra" books of the LXX.  When the NT quotes the OT, 85% of the
time it is from the LXX.  But in the 2nd century, as Christians
debated with Jews trying to convert them, they needed to meet
them on their own ground, i.e. the Hebrew canon.  As certain
Church Fathers stopped using the "extra" books in debates, some
Christians came to doubt their inspiration.  However, facts show
that when these same Church Fathers taught in their own circles,
they employed the full LXX.

The Septuagint was accepted as the official and inspired version
of the OT because of its long-standing and consistent use by the
Apostles and their disciples.  In 393 St. Augustine and the
Council of Hippo approved the list of books as contained in the
present Catholic Bible.  This was likewise ratified at Carthage
in 397 and 419 and by the church practices of Rome.


       THEN WHY DO CHRISTIANS HAVE DIFFERENT OLD TESTAMENTS?

The early Christian Church was Greek-speaking; it therefore used
the LXX.  Even though the LXX sometimes gave different readings
from the original Hebrew and had "extra" books interspersed with
the rest, the early Church believed it to be inspired.  "With
regard to whatever is in the Septuagint that is not in the Hebrew
manuscripts, we can say that the one Spirit wished to say to them
through the writers of the former rather than through the latter
in order to show that both the one and the other were inspired"
(St. Augustine, City of God, 18:43).

Hence the Orthodox Church uses only the LXX and not the original
Hebrew as the official inspired OT.  The LXX, compared to the
Hebrew Bible, has the following additional books:  Tobit, Judith,
Wisdom of Solomon, Sirach, Baruch (including the Letter of
Jeremias), 1-3 Machabees, Prayer of Manasseh, Psalm 151, 1
Esdras, additions to Esther and Daniel, and very rarely, 4
Machabees since it was not widely available and was never
considered inspired.

Since the Christians in the West spoke Latin, they translated the
Bible into Latin, beginning about A.D. 150.  But this was first
of all done from the LXX, not the Hebrew.  It wasn't until the
end of the 4th century that St. Jerome made a translation from
the Hebrew.  It was then that he discovered that the Jews had a
different Bible.  Believing that Jesus never used anything other
that the Hebrew Bible, Jerome  wished to adopt their canon.
Modern historical studies have shown, however, that the Jews did
in fact have these other books and read them during Christ's
time.  Jerome was merely ill-informed, and the Tradition of the
Church prevailed.  Hence the Latin Bible (known as the Vulgate)
contained the same books as the LXX.

Increasingly, copies of the Latin Bible dropped out 1 Esdras, 3
Machabees, the Prayer of Manasseh, and Psalm 151.  Consequently,
when the Catholic Church responded to Protestantism at the
Council of Trent, the Latin Vulgate that was made official on
April 8, 1546, did not include these four works.

Protestantism, initiated by Martin Luther, accepted the Jewish
canon.  Like Jerome, believing that Jesus used only the Hebrew
Bible, Luther excluded the additional books found in the LXX.  He
also rejected the role of oral tradition as being equally
authoritative with Scripture.  Hence he questioned the Church's
right to say which books were canonical.  He himself, though,
repudiated Esther and James and looked askance at the Apocalypse.
Had Protestantism followed Luther's preferences in the NT,
Christendom would not only have different Old Testaments, but
different New Testaments as well.

Besides Catholics, Orthodox, and Protestants having varying Old
Testaments, the unfortunately forgotten and yet venerable Coptic
and Ethiopian Churches include one book more than the Orthodox:
the Book of Enoch.  The Letter of Jude 14-15 is a direct quote
from 1 Enoch 1:9.  Scholarship has shown that the book of Enoch
also influenced at least 15 other NT Books.  It was widely used
and considered inspired by numerous Church Fathers up until the
4th century.  The West lost it because it was never translated
into Latin.  Later in the East it also fell into disuse because
of some heretical misuse.

Because of local church councils and differences in language,
coupled later on with a lack of historical criticism and
knowledge, modern Christendom now has four Old Testaments.


                WHAT ARE THE DISPUTED BOOKS CALLED?

Whatever books of the LXX that are not part of the Hebrew Bible,
the Protestants call Apocrypha, meaning "hidden."  Anything
outside of the LXX, Protestants call Pseudepigrapha,
meaning "false writings."

Catholics call the books accepted by the Jews Protocanonical,
meaning the "first canon."  The others listed form the
Deuterocanonical books, the "second canon".  All the rest they
call Apocrypha.

The Orthodox follow suit but have additional books in the list of
Deuterocanonicals.  Anything not found in the LXX is called
Apocrypha.

Coptics would group 1 Enoch along with the Deuterocanonical books
and call any other ancient writings Apocrypha.


